>> Stewart: ON THIS EDITION FOR
SATURDAY, MAY 14TH:
THE FLOW OF MIGRANTS AND
REFUGEES FROM THE MIDDLE EAST TO
EUROPE SLOWS DOWN, WHILE THE
UNITED STATES STEPS UP
DEPORTATIONS OF UNDOCUMENTED
MIGRANTS FROM CENTRAL AMERICA.
AND IN OUR SIGNATURE SEGMENT,
"BEYOND DEBT AND ZIKA," PUERTO
RICO HAS A GARBAGE CRISIS.
>> WHENEVER IT RAINS AND THE
STORM WATER SEWER DOESN'T WORK,
THE COMMUNITIES GET FLOODED WITH
RAW SEWAGE.
>> Stewart: NEXT, ON PBS
NEWSHOUR WEEKEND.
FROM THE TISCH WNET STUDIOS AT
LINCOLN CENTER IN NEW YORK,
ALISON STEWART.
>> Stewart: GOOD EVENING AND
THANKS FOR JOINING US.
THE FLOW OF MIGRANTS AND
REFUGEES TO EUROPE'S MAIN ENTRY
POINT, GREECE, IS GOING DOWN,
BUT THE FINANCIAL COST TO THE
NATION WELCOMING THE MOST
MIGRANTS, GERMANY, IS GOING UP.
SINCE THE EUROPEAN UNION CUT OFF
ENTRY TO MIGRANTS LEAVING TURKEY
AND ARRIVING BY BOAT IN GREECE,
NEW ARRIVALS IN GREECE HAVE
DROPPED 90% TO FEWER THAN 3,000
IN APRIL, ACCORDING TO THE E.U.
BORDER CONTROL AGENCY FRONTEX.
THE E.U. IS NOW SENDING REFUGEES
FROM SYRIA, IRAQ, AND
AFGHANISTAN BACK TO TURKEY, AND
PAYING TURKEY TO ACCEPT THEM.
STILL, SOME 8,000 REFUGEES FROM
AFRICA-- ESPECIALLY FROM LIBYA,
EGYPT, ERITREA, AND NIGERIA--
MADE IT TO ITALY LAST MONTH.
JUST YESTERDAY THE ITALIAN
COAST GUARD RESCUED MORE THAN
500 MIGRANTS FROM TWO BOATS
STRANDED ON THE MEDITERRANEAN
SEA.
IN GERMANY, A REPORT PUBLISHED
TODAY SAYS THAT COUNTRY EXPECTS
TO SPEND $106 BILLION OVER THE
NEXT FIVE YEARS HOSTING MIGRANTS
AND REFUGEES.
THE FIGURE COMES FROM A GERMAN
FINANCE MINISTRY DOCUMENT
OBTAINED BY THE NEWS MAGAZINE
"DER SPIEGEL."
GERMANY ADMITTED MORE THAN A
MILLION MIGRANTS AND REFUGEES
LAST YEAR AND IS ON TRACK TO
ACCEPT 600,000 THIS YEAR.
THE FINANCE MINISTRY PROJECTS
700,000 MORE COULD SETTLE IN
GERMANY IN 2017 AND 2018.
THE COSTS INCLUDE HOUSING,
WELFARE PAYMENTS, AND LANGUAGE
TRAINING, THOUGH THE FINANCE
MINISTRY PREDICTS A MAJORITY OF
MIGRANTS GRANTED ASYLUM WILL
OBTAIN JOBS.
NIGERIA IS HOSTING A REGIONAL
SUMMIT TO COMBAT THE ISLAMIC
MILITANT GROUP BOKO HARAM.
FRENCH PRESIDENT FRANCOIS
HOLLANDE WAS IN THE NIGERIAN
CAPITAL OF ABUJA TODAY FOR THE
MEETING WITH SECURITY OFFICIALS
MAINLY FROM OTHER AFRICAN
COUNTRIES.
BOKO HARAM IS BLAMED FOR KILLING
CLOSE TO 7,000 PEOPLE LAST YEAR,
MORE THAN ANY OTHER TERRORIST
GROUP, INCLUDING ISIS.
IT IS ALSO THE GROUP THAT
ABDUCTED MORE THAN 200 NIGERIAN
SCHOOLGIRLS IN 2014, WHO HAVE
NOT BEEN RELEASED.
THE WEST AFRICAN NATION OF
CAMEROON ANNOUNCED TODAY THAT
MULTINATIONAL FORCES CAPTURED
FIVE BOKO HARAM LEADERS EARLIER
THIS MONTH AND FREED 46 WOMEN
AND CHILDREN WHO WERE HELD
CAPTIVE.
WITH DONALD TRUMP JUST 103
DELEGATES SHORT OF SECURING THE
REPUBLICAN PRESIDENTIAL
NOMINATION, THE BIGGEST DONOR IN
THE LAST PRESIDENTIAL ELECTION
IS BACKING HIM.
BILLIONAIRE CASINO OWNER SHELDON
ADELSON, WHO PUBLICLY ENDORSED
TRUMP YESTERDAY, HAS PRIVATELY
INFORMED HIM HE PLANS TO GIVE UP
TO $100 MILLION TO GROUPS AND
SUPER PACS FOR TRUMP, ACCORDING
TO THE "NEW YORK TIMES."
ADELSON GAVE $93 MILLION IN 2012
TO GROUPS SUPPORTING
REPUBLICANS, INCLUDING MITT
ROMNEY AND NEWT GINGRICH.
TRUMP IS REPORTEDLY CONSIDERING
GINGRICH, A FORMER SPEAKER OF
THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES, TO
BE HIS RUNNING MATE.
HAWAII IS THE FIRST STATE TO SUE
JAPANESE COMPANY TAKATA FOR
MANUFACTURING DEFECTIVE
AIRBAGS.
THE SUIT FILED YESTERDAY SEEKS
$700 MILLION IN PENALTIES, OR
$10,000 FOR EACH OF 70,000 CARS
SOLD IN HAWAII WITH THE AIRBAGS.
A CHEMICAL IN THE AIRBAGS
CAUSES THEM TO EXPLODE AND SPEW
SHRAPNEL, WHICH HAS RESULTED IN
SEVEN DEATHS AND MORE THAN 100
INJURIES IN THE U.S.
HAWAII'S OFFICE OF CONSUMER
PROTECTION SAYS THE STATE'S
CLIMATE, THE HEAT AND HUMIDITY,
MAKES THE EXPLOSIONS MORE
LIKELY.
THE FEDERAL TRANSPORTATION
DEPARTMENT HAS ALREADY IMPOSED A
$200 MILLION FINE ON TAKATA AND
EXPANDED THE RECALL OF ITS
AIRBAGS TO 40 MILLION VEHICLES.
>> Stewart: IN THE COMING WEEKS,
THE DEPARTMENT OF HOMELAND
SECURITY IS PLANNING TO STEP UP
THE ARREST AND DEPORTATION OF
UNDOCUMENTED IMMIGRANTS WHOSE
ASYLUM CLAIMS HAVE BEEN DENIED.
MANY ASYLUM SEEKERS SAID THEY
HAD FLED VIOLENCE IN CENTRAL
AMERICA.
THE DEPORTATIONS WILL MOST
IMMEDIATELY AFFECT SOME 50,000
MIGRANTS ARRESTED CROSSING THE
SOUTHWEST U.S. BORDER BETWEEN
LAST OCTOBER AND THIS MARCH.
REUTERS REPORTER JULIA EDWARDS,
WHO COVERS HOMELAND SECURITY,
BROKE THE STORY THIS WEEK, AND
SHE JOINS ME NOW FROM WASHINGTON
TO DISCUSS IT.
JULIA, THESE RAIDS ARE COMING IN
RESPONSE TO A SURGE OF PEOPLE
COMING FROM CENTRAL AMERICA.
WHO'S COMING AND WHY THE SURGE?
>> SO WE KNOW THAT WOMEN AND
CHILDREN-- SOME TRAVELING
TOGETHER, SOME CHILDREN
TRAVELING WITHOUT A GUARDIAN--
HAVE BEEN COMING UP FROM THE
THREE COUNTRIES IN CENTRAL
AMERICA THEY CALL THE NORTHERN
TRIANGLE.
THAT WOULD BE GUATEMALA, EL
SALVADOR AND HONDURAS.
THEY'RE ESCAPING POVERTY.
THERE HAS BEEN EXTREME DROUGHT
IN THAT REGION THIS YEAR AND
ALSO ESCAPING VIOLENCE.
THERE ARE DRUG CARTELS WHO HAVE
REALLY MADE LIVING CONDITIONS
VERY POOR IN THESE PLACES.
AND SO SINCE 2014 WE REALLY
BEGAN TO SEE A SURGE OF PEOPLE
COMING ACROSS THE BORDER, UP
THROUGH MEXICO, TAKING VERY
DANGEROUS JOURNEYS, OFTEN PAYING
HUMAN SMUGGLERS EXORBITANT
PRICES JUST TO GET THEM ACROSS
THE BORDER.
BUT WE SAW A BIT OF A DIP IN
2015.
THE DEPARTMENT OF HOMELAND
SECURITY THOUGHT THAT THEY HAD
MORE OR LESS GOTTEN THIS PROBLEM
UNDER CONTROL BY TRYING TO GET
THE MESSAGE BACK TO CENTRAL
AMERICA THAT ILLEGAL IMMIGRANTS
COULD NOT STAY IN THE UNITED
STATES.
HOWEVER, AT THE END OF LAST YEAR
AND COMING UP UNTIL ABOUT LAST
MARCH, THE LATEST NUMBERS WE
HAVE AVAILABLE, THERE'S ACTUALLY
BEEN A SURGE AGAIN.
>> THERE WERE RAIDS LIKE THIS IN
JANUARY.
SO THESE RAIDS THAT ARE GOING TO
HAPPEN IN THE NEXT MONTH OR
SO, ALLEGEDLY GOING TO HAPPEN IN
THE NEXT MONTH OR SO, HOW ARE
THEY EXPECTED TO BE DIFFERENT?
>> SO THE RAIDS IN JANUARY WERE
JUST OVER TWO DAYS, JANUARY 2-3,
AND FOCUSED ON THREE STATES--
TEXAS, GEORGIA, AND NORTH
CAROLINA.
THESE RAIDS ARE TO TAKE PLACE
OVER A 30-DAY PERIOD NATIONWIDE.
AND A DOCUMENT THAT WENT OUT TO
THE FIELD OFFICES, IT EXPLAINED
TO EACH ENFORCEMENT FIELD OFFICE
TO GO AHEAD AND TAKE INVENTORY
OF WHO WAS IN THEIR FIELD, WHO
HAD ALREADY GOTTEN A FINAL ORDER
OF DEPORTATION.
AND THAT IS A POINT THE WHITE
HOUSE IS REALLY TRYING TO DRIVE
HOME AS WELL.
THESE ARE PEOPLE WHO HAVE
ACTUALLY GONE THROUGH THE COURT
SYSTEM, THEIR CASES HAVE BEEN
HEARD, THEY WERE NOT GRANTED
ASYLUM AND A JUDGE HAS ORDERED
THEM TO HAVE DEPORTATION.
IN JANUARY IT WAS 121 WOMEN AND
CHILDREN WHO WERE ARRESTED.
THIS TIME, WE'RE LIKELY TO SEE
MANY MORE THAN THAT.
>> ONCE PEOPLE ARE APPREHENDED,
WHERE DO THEY GO?
HOW LONG IS THE PROCESS?
>> WE KNOW THAT IN JANUARY, WHEN
ICE AGENTS CAME TO THE DOORS OF
THESE FAMILIES OFTEN IN THE
EARLY MORNING HOURS, ARRESTED
THEM, THEY BROUGHT THEM TO
DETENTION FACILITIES.
THERE IS ONE VERY NOTABLE ONE IN
DILLEY, TEXAS, WHERE WOMEN AND
CHILDREN WERE KEPT WHERE THEY
COULD BE PROCESSED.
THERE WAS A BIT OF A BACK AND
FORTH THAT GOES ON THERE WHILE
THEY'RE AT THE DETENTION
FACILITY.
IF THEY ARE APPROVED THEY WILL
BE PUT ONTO PLANES AND DEPORTED
BACK.
>> THE TWO CANDIDATES RUNNING
FOR THE DEMOCRATIC TICKET HAVE
CRITICIZED THE OBAMA
ADMINISTRATION'S STRATEGY HERE.
HOW DO THEY DEFEND IT?
>> THE WHITE HOUSE SPOKESMAN
YESTERDAY WAS ASKED HOW DO YOU
DEFEND THE POLICY?
WHAT HE STUCK TO IS IT IS IN THE
PRESIDENT'S PRIORITIES TO
DEPORT PEOPLE WHO ARE RECENT
ARRIVALS, THAT IS PEOPLE WHO
HAVE ARRIVED AFTER JANUARY 1,
2014.
THAT DATE IS IMPORTANT BECAUSE
OF COURSE WE SAW A SURGE START
AROUND 2014.
AND AT THE SAME TIME THAT OBAMA
LAID OUT HIS IMMIGRATION
EXECUTIVE ACTION IN NOVEMBER OF
2014, WE SAW THAT THERE WAS
ANOTHER CAVEAT TO THAT, THAT
WHILE HE WAS GOING TO PROTECT
SOME PEOPLE FROM
DEPORTATION, THERE WERE
OTHER PEOPLE WHO WERE PRIORITIES
FOR DEPORTATION, AND THAT WAS
CRIMINAL ALIENS AND ALSO NEW
ARRIVALS.
IT'S SORT OF PART OF A STRATEGY
OF WE CAN'T DEPORT EVERYONE
HERE, THAT IS 11 MILLION PEOPLE.
BUT WE WANT TO TRY TO SECURE
OUR BORDERS AND SAY NO, YOU
CAN'T COME TO THE U.S. ILLEGALLY
AND EXPECT TO SAY.
>> JULIA EDWARDS FROM REUTERS,
THANK YOU FOR SHARING YOUR
REPORTING.
>> THANK YOU.
>> Stewart: AS THE NEWSHOUR
REPORTED IN THE PAST WEEK, THE
UNITED STATES TERRITORY OF
PUERTO RICO IS STRUGGLING
ECONOMICALLY.
EARLIER THIS MONTH IT DEFAULTED
ON $400 MILLION IN PAYMENTS ON
ITS $70 BILLION OF DEBT.
AT THE SAME TIME, PUERTO RICO IS
DEALING WITH AN OUTBREAK OF THE
ZIKA VIRUS, WHICH THE CENTERS
FOR DISEASE CONTROL AND
PREVENTION HAS PREDICTED, COULD
INFECT A QUARTER OF THE ISLAND'S
3.5 MILLION RESIDENTS.
THERE'S A THIRD CRISIS BREWING
ON PUERTO RICO: GARBAGE.
THE ISLAND SIMPLY DOES NOT HAVE
ENOUGH WORKING LANDFILLS TO
DISPOSE OF ITS GARBAGE OR
METHODS IN PLACE TO RECYCLE IT.
IN TONIGHT'S SIGNATURE SEGMENT,
THE NEWSHOUR'S IVETTE FELICIANO
REPORTS ON EFFORTS TO FIX THIS
PROBLEM, ESPECIALLY IN ONE AREA
OF PUERTO RICO WHERE GARBAGE AND
RAW SEWAGE ARE DUMPED DIRECTLY
INTO A WATERWAY.
>> Reporter: ROMANA CASTRO
SLEEPS WITH HER TWO CHILDREN ON
DONATED MATTRESSES IN THIS SMALL
BUNK BED.
SHE LOST MOST OF HER FURNITURE
AND BELONGINGS LAST MONTH, WHEN
SEVERAL FEET OF RAW SEWAGE AND
TRASH FLOODED HER CEMENT BLOCK
HOME IN PUERTO RICO'S CAPITAL,
SAN JUAN.
>> (translated): I WAS ASLEEP,
AND I HEARD WATER RUNNING, AND I
SAID, "WHAT IS THAT?"
AND WHEN I GET UP AND CHECK, I
SEE THAT WATER IS POURING IN.
WATER WAS COMING IN FROM THE
TOILET.
LOTS AND LOTS OF BLACK WATER.
I DIDN'T HAVE TIME TO BRING
ANYTHING INSIDE OR GET ANYTHING
OUT OF THE WAY.
>> Reporter: THE PROBLEM OF
CONTAMINATED WATER AND TRASH
LITERALLY FLOWING INTO HOMES IN
HER NEIGHBORHOOD IS DECADES-OLD,
AND GETTING WORSE.
CASTRO IS ONE OF 27,000 PEOPLE
WHO LIVE IN A RING OF
IMPOVERISHED COMMUNITIES ALONG
THE CANO DE MARTIN PENA, OR THE
MARTIN PENA CHANNEL, A HEAVILY
POLLUTED WATERWAY CONNECTING SAN
JUAN BAY AND A SERIES OF
LAGOONS.
>> (translated): THE WATER WAS
POURING IN FROM THE SHOWER AND
THE TOILET.
AND IT WASN'T CLEAR WATER.
IT WAS COMPLETELY DIRTY, REALLY
AWFUL.
COMPLETELY BLACK.
THIS TIME IT WAS WORSE THAN
EVER.
PEOPLE HAVE BEEN COMPARING THIS
LAST FLOOD TO HURRICANE HUGO.
THAT'S WHAT IT FELT LIKE.
>> Reporter: THE WATER IS SO
POLLUTED, BECAUSE THE AREA HAS
NEVER HAD ADEQUATE SEWER SYSTEMS
DATING BACK 80 YEARS AGO, WHEN
HOUSING FOR INDUSTRIAL WORKERS
WAS BUILT HERE.
MORE THAN 3,000 HOMES AND
BUILDINGS STILL DISCHARGE RAW
SEWAGE DIRECTLY INTO THE MARTIN
PENA CHANNEL.
JUST AS DAMAGING, PEOPLE INSIDE
AND OUTSIDE THE COMMUNITIES USE
THE CHANNEL AS A GARBAGE DUMP.
>> (translated): WE'VE HAD TO
INTERVENE AND STEP IN WHEN THEY
ARRIVE.
THEY BRING TRASH AND TIRES IN
THE MIDDLE OF THE NIGHT.
AND AT 2:00 A.M., WHO WILL BE
HERE TO FIGHT WITH THEM AND TELL
THEM TO STOP?
>> Reporter: THE CHANNEL WAS
ONCE 400 FEET WIDE AND TEN FEET
DEEP, POPULAR FOR SWIMMING AND
FISHING.
TODAY, THE WATERWAY, CLOGGED
WITH GARBAGE AND SEWAGE, HAS
SHRUNK TO 30 FEET WIDE AND THREE
FEET DEEP, AND ALMOST NO ONE
GOES IN IT.
IT IS A MAGNET FOR MOSQUITOES,
POTENTIALLY CARRYING THE ZIKA
VIRUS, AT A TIME WHEN 925 PEOPLE
ON THE ISLAND ARE CONFIRMED TO
HAVE BEEN INFECTED WITH ZIKA.
DOCTOR HECTOR VILLANUEVA IS
MEDICAL DIRECTOR AT HEALTH
PRO-MED, A CLINIC THAT OFFERS
LOW COST, AND IN MANY CASES
FREE, SERVICES TO RESIDENTS
ALONG THE CHANNEL.
>> WHEN THE TRASH IS PRESENT, IT
USUALLY ATTRACTS INSECTS, RATS,
AND ALL KINDS OF VECTORS AND
ANIMALS THAT MAY TRANSMIT
DISEASES.
>> Reporter: A 2014 STUDY BY
MOUNT SINAI MEDICAL SCHOOL IN
NEW YORK FOUND PEOPLE WHO LIVE
AROUND THE CHANNEL HAVE HIGHER
LEVELS OF GASTROINTESTINAL
DISEASE THAN THE OVERALL RATE IN
PUERTO RICO.
AND UNIVERSITY OF PUERTO RICO
RESEARCHERS FOUND THAT CHILDREN
HERE ARE MORE LIKELY TO DEVELOP
BRONCHIAL ASTHMA AND SKIN
CONDITIONS.
CASTRO IS CONCERNED ABOUT THE
HEALTH OF HER TWO CHILDREN, AND
THE THIRD ON THE WAY.
SHE'S SIX MONTHS PREGNANT.
>> (translated): I'M
ESPECIALLY WORRIED BECAUSE I'M
PREGNANT, AND ZIKA RIGHT NOW IS
A BIG THREAT IN THIS COUNTRY.
SO I'M REALLY WORRIED, BECAUSE I
SEE MORE MOSQUITOES THAN EVER
BEFORE.
>> Reporter: PREGNANT WOMAN ARE
ESPECIALLY AT RISK, AS ZIKA CAN
CAUSE MICROCEPHALY, A BIRTH
DEFECT THAT CAUSES BABIES TO
HAVE ABNORMALLY SMALL HEADS AND
BRAINS.
JUST YESTERDAY THE TERRITORY
ANNOUNCED ITS FIRST ZIKA-RELATED
MICROCEPHALY CASE AMONG THE 128
PREGNANT WOMEN DIAGNOSED WITH
VIRUS.
DOCTOR VILLANUEVA TELLS HIS
PATIENTS TO DO WHAT THEY CAN TO
AVOID MOSQUITO BITES.
>> THE PROBLEM IS THAT THE
COMMUNITY'S VERY POOR.
SO THE RECOMMENDATIONS ARE NOT
REALLY AFFORDABLE TO THEM.
SOME OF THEM CANNOT BUY THE
INSECT REPELLANT.
OR IT'S ALSO RECOMMENDED THAT
THEY SHOULD USE SCREENS AND THEY
SHOULD TAKE ADVANTAGE OF THE AIR
CONDITIONER.
BUT THOSE THINGS ARE NOT
AFFORDABLE TO OUR COMMUNITY,
SO WE HAVE TO DEAL WITH THEIR
REALITY.
>> Reporter: LAST MONTH, HIS
CLINIC RECEIVED A $250,000 GRANT
FROM FEDERAL DEPARTMENT OF
HEALTH AND HUMAN SERVICES AND
THE CENTERS FOR DISEASE CONTROL
AND PREVENTION FOR A ZIKA-
AWARENESS CAMPAIGN.
CLINIC BOARD MEMBER CARMEN VELEZ
VEGA IS A PROFESSOR AT THE
UNIVERSITY OF PUERTO RICO SCHOOL
OF PUBLIC HEALTH AND SAYS PART
OF THE PROBLEM IS THAT THE
AMOUNT OF TRASH HERE UNDERMINES
THEIR EFFORTS.
>> THE GARBAGE TRUCK, DOESN'T
COME HERE AS OFTEN AS IT COMES
TO OTHER COMMUNITIES.
THERE ARE PLACES HERE WHERE THE
TRUCK WILL COME ONCE AND
SOMETIMES EVEN TWICE A DAY.
BUT THAT'S NOT WHAT'S GOING TO
HAPPEN HERE.
THERE ARE PARTS OF THIS
COMMUNITY THAT PROBABLY WON'T
SEE A TRUCK IN MORE THAN A WEEK.
AND SOMETIMES MAYBE MORE.
THERE IS A DIFFERENCE IN TERMS
OF THE ATTENTION THAT
COMMUNITIES LIKE THESE GET.
>> Reporter: THE CLINIC TESTS
PATIENTS FOR ZIKA IF THEY
EXHIBIT SYMPTOMS LIKE A RASH OR
RED EYES.
SO FAR, IT HAS DOCUMENTED ONLY
ONE CASE OF THE VIRUS.
BUT JUST STEPS AWAY FROM THE
CLINIC, WE MET CARMEN HERNANDEZ,
WHO SAYS SHE CONTRACTED ZIKA
AFTER HAVING SEX WITH HER
HUSBAND, BECAUSE SHE DIDN'T
KNOW THE VIRUS CAN BE SPREAD
THROUGH INTERCOURSE.
A PROPOSED RESTORATION PROJECT
WOULD DREDGE THE MARTIN PENA
CHANNEL, BUILD A SEWAGE SYSTEM,
AND RELOCATE FAMILIES DURING THE
CLEANUP.
THE PUERTO RICAN GOVERNMENT HAS
ALREADY SPENT $120 MILLION
ADDRESSING THE FAULTY SEWAGE
SYSTEM IN SOME AREAS AND
PREPARING FOR THE DREDGING.
LYVIA RODRIGUEZ HEADS "ENLACE,"
AN ORGANIZATION CREATED BY
PUERTO RICO'S GOVERNMENT TO
IMPLEMENT THE PROJECT IN
PARTNERSHIP WITH THE
ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION AGENCY
AND THE ARMY CORPS OF ENGINEERS.
>> EVERY TIME THERE IS A FLOOD,
LIKE THE ONE WE HAD TWO WEEKS
AGO, THE GOVERNMENT HAS TO SPEND
MILLIONS OF DOLLARS DEALING WITH
THE CRISIS AND THE EMERGENCY
WHEN WE SHOULD BE SPENDING THOSE
SAME DOLLARS IN DEALING WITH THE
ISSUE.
HOWEVER, WE DO KNOW THAT PUERTO
RICO CANNOT AFFORD BY ITSELF TO
DEAL WITH THE CAO DE MARTIIN
PEA RESTORATION.
>> Reporter: THE ESTIMATED COST
OF THE RESTORATION PROJECT IS
$600 MILLION.
ABOUT HALF STILL NEEDS TO BE
SECURED.
CONGRESS HAS PROMISED A QUARTER
OF THE FUNDS FOR THE E.P.A. AND
ARMY CORPS OF ENGINEERS TO
ASSIST THE CLEANUP.
THE PUERTO RICAN GOVERNMENT AND
ITS AGENCIES ARE SUPPOSED TO
PROVIDE A THIRD OF THE FUNDS,
BUT THE DEBT CRISIS HAS PUT THAT
MONEY IN JEOPARDY.
RODRIGUEZ SAYS THAT'S WHY PLANS
TO BUILD A SEWAGE SYSTEM ALONG
THE CHANNEL HAVE BEEN DELAYED.
>> WE HAVE HAD ONE PROJECT, FOR
EXAMPLE, WHICH IS THE RELOCATION
OF A POTABLE WATER LANE THAT HAS
BEEN IN THE BIDDING PROCESS FOR
OVER A YEAR BECAUSE THEY DO NOT
HAVE CASH FLOW TO BE ABLE TO
CONSTRUCT IT.
SO THOSE ARE THE KINDS OF ISSUES
THAT THE COMMUNITY HAS BEEN
FACING CURRENTLY, BECAUSE OF THE
FISCAL CRISIS.
>> Reporter: THE MARTIN PENA
CHANNEL IS A SYMPTOM OF MUCH
LARGER TRASH TROUBLE ON THE
ISLAND.
>> E.P.A. HAS BEEN TELLING
PUERTO RICO FOR MANY YEARS THAT
WE ARE GETTING TO THE END OF THE
ROAD.
>> Reporter: PUERTO RICO
GOVERNOR ALEJANDRO GARCIA-
PADILLA SAYS THE ISLAND IS DOING
WHAT IT CAN TO REDUCE WASTE.
DURING THE PAST 30 YEARS, THE
ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION AGENCY
HAS ORDERED THE CLOSURE OF MORE
THAN 50 LANDFILLS ACROSS THE
ISLAND FOR LEAKAGE ISSUES
CONTAMINATING GROUNDWATER AND
NOT BEING UP TO ENVIRONMENTAL
STANDARDS.
>> IT HASN'T BEEN A PROBLEM YET
TO PICK UP TRASH FROM THE
HOUSES.
WHAT IS A REAL PROBLEM, AND WILL
BE IF WE DO NOT ATTEMPT TO TRY
TO TACKLE NOW, IS WHAT THEY DO
WITH THE TRASH.
>> Reporter: OF 29 LANDFILLS
LEFT, THE E.P.A. HAS ORDERED
EIGHT MORE TO CLOSE DURING THE
NEXT FIVE YEARS.
TO REDUCE LANDFILL WASTE, GARCIA
PADILLA RECENTLY ISSUED AN
EXECUTIVE ORDER OUTLAWING
PLASTIC BAGS, AND SAYS HE'S
WORKING TO EXPAND RECYCLING.
THE ISLAND RECYCLES LESS THAN
15% OF ITS GARBAGE, COMPARED TO
35% ON THE MAINLAND.
THE LANDFILL CLOSURES MAKE
GARBAGE DISPOSAL EVEN MORE
CHALLENGING FOR RESIDENTS ALONG
THE MARTIN PENA CHANNEL.
>> BASICALLY, BECAUSE PEOPLE
HAVE LESS OPPORTUNITIES OF WHERE
TO TAKE THEIR GARBAGE TO, OR
THEY WANT TO AVOID THE FEES TO
DISPOSE OF PROPERLY OF THE
GARBAGE IN WAYS, THEY LOOK FOR
PLACES WHERE YOU CAN USE ILLEGAL
DUMP SITES AND DISPOSE OF THIS
GARBAGE.
>> Reporter: WHILE THE
GOVERNMENT WORKS TO BOOST
RECYCLING RATES ACROSS THE
ISLAND, PEOPLE LIVING HERE HAVE
LAUNCHED A COMMUNITY RECYCLING
PROGRAM TO DO THEIR PART ON THE
GROUND.
>> (translated): THE E.P.A.
TOLD US THIS IS THE LAW.
SO, IF IT IS THE LAW, WE'LL MAKE
IT HAPPEN.
>> Reporter: NEXT MONTH THEY
HOPE TO SIGN AN AGREEMENT WITH
THE U.S. ARMY CORPS TO DESIGN
THE CLEANUP PROGRAM.
OBVIOUSLY THE TRASH SITUATION
HAS BEEN AN ISSUE IN THIS
COMMUNITY FOR DECADES.
THE ECONOMIC CRISIS AND ZIKA.
>> ALL THESE THREE ELEMENTS
OBVIOUSLY DOESN'T HELP US.
BECAUSE ZIKA IS BAD IN ANY
MOMENT, BUT RIGHT NOW WITH ALL
THOSE EXTERNAL FACTORS AFFECTING
THE QUALITY OF LIFE FOR
POPULATION, IT HAS A GREATER
IMPACT.
>> Reporter: UNTIL THE CHANNEL
CLEANUP BEGINS, ROMANA CASTRO
LIVES IN FEAR OF THE NEXT STORM,
AND THE FILTHY FLOOD IT COULD
BRING.
>> (translated): MATERIAL
THINGS CAN ALWAYS BE
BOUGHT AGAIN, BUT MY CHILD'S
LIFE?
THAT'S COMPLETELY DIFFERENT.
OR THEY COULD GET SICK, ALL OF
THAT CONTAMINATED WATER COULD
MAKE THEM SICK.
IT REALLY WORRIES ME.
>> Stewart: LEARN MORE ABOUT HOW
ECONOMIC WOES AND THE THREAT OF
ZIKA ARE AFFECTING LIFE FOR
PEOPLE IN PUERTO RICO.
WATCH OUR REPORTS ONLINE AT
www.pbs.org/newshour.
>> Stewart: TURNING TO THE
MIDDLE EAST AND THE WAR ON ISIS,
THE UNITED STATES IS NOW
DEPLOYING A SMALL NUMBER OF
SPECIAL OPERATIONS TROOPS ON THE
GROUND IN LIBYA.
IT'S PART OF A STRATEGY TO
WEAKEN ISIS AND SUPPORT A UNITY
GOVERNMENT IN LIBYA, WHICH HAS
BEEN TORN APART BY CIVIL UNREST
SINCE A EUROPEAN-LED MISSION
BACKED BY THE U.S. TOPPLED
LIBYAN DICTATOR MUAMMAR GADDAFI
FIVE YEARS AGO.
"WASHINGTON POST" REPORTER MISSY
RYAN HAS WRITTEN ABOUT THE NEW
LIBYA MISSION, AND SHE JOINS ME
NOW FROM WASHINGTON.
SO MISSY, WE KNOW
ISIS AS THE ISLAMIC STATE IN
IRAQ AND SYRIA.
WHEN AND WHERE DID IT BEGIN TO
SETTLE IN LIBYA?
>> THE ISLAMIC STATE IN LIBYA
REALLY BECAME A POWERFUL FORCE
IN 2015 AND IT WAS ESTABLISHED
WITH A COMBINATION OF
INDIVIDUALS SENT BY THE ISLAMIC
STATE PARENT GROUP IN IRAQ AND
SYRIA, AND THEN PULLING FROM THE
SORT OF HODGEPODGE OF MILITANT
GROUPS, DISENFRANCHISED PEOPLE
WHO HAVEN'T FARED WELL IN THE
POST REVOLUTION ERA IN LIBYA
ITSELF.
SO IT IS A MIX OF FOREIGNERS AND
LIBYANS AND REALLY ESTABLISHED A
STRONGHOLD IN THE COASTAL CITY
OF SIRTE.
AND WHILE THE ISLAMIC STATE IS
MUCH SMALLER IN LIBYA THAN IRAQ
AND SYRIA, IT'S SEEN AS THE
MOST POWERFUL AFFILIATE BY THE
U.S. AND ITS ALLIES.
>> YOU REPORTED THE U.S. SPECIAL
OPERATIONS HAS BEEN IN LIBYA IN
TWO DIFFERENT LOCATIONS, TWO
DIFFERENT OUTPOST THIS PAST YEAR
AND THEY ARE THE SMALL CONTACT
TEAMS, I BELIEVE IS HOW YOU
WROTE ABOUT IT.
CAN YOU EXPLAIN WHAT THAT MEANS
AND WHAT THEIR MISSION IS?
>> SURE.
IT'S REALLY AN ASSESSMENT
MISSION.
IT ISN'T SO UNUSUAL; THE UNITED
STATES HAS SMALL SPECIAL
OPERATIONS PRESENCES IN VARIOUS
PLACES.
BUT THE GOAL HERE IN LIBYA IS
REALLY TO HELP ENHANCE U.S.
AWARENESS OF THE SITUATION ON
THE GROUND.
THE IDEA IS THAT THESE SMALL
NUMBERS OF AMERICANS SPECIAL
OPERATION FORCES WILL SORT
THROUGH THE FACTIONS AND
IDENTIFY POTENTIAL RECIPIENTS OF
AMERICAN SUPPORT IN THE FUTURE.
SO THE IDEA IS THAT THE UNITED
STATES, THE OBAMA ADMINISTRATION
WANTS TO MAKE SURE THAT THERE IS
READY, IF THEY DO DECIDE TO
LAUNCH AN EXPANDED OPERATION IN
LIBYA, THAT THEY HAVE PARTNER
FORCES ON THE GROUND WHO THEY
CAN VET AND THEN SUPPORT AS
THEY GO IN AND DO THE FIGHTING.
>> FROM THIS STRATEGY, WHAT
LESSONS HAVE THE U.S. LEARNED
FROM FIGHTING ISIS IN IRAQ AND
SYRIA?
>> I THINK ONE OF THE LESSONS
THAT THEY'VE LEARNED IS THAT IT
REALLY WILL TAKE AN EFFECTIVE
PARTNER ON THE GROUND.
NOT JUST A CAPABLE MILITARY
PARTNER BUT ALSO A PARTNER
THAT CAN BRING THE RIGHT
POLITICAL AND GOVERNANCE TOOLS
TO ACTUALLY BRING ABOUT A
LASTING DEFEAT OF THE ISLAMIC
STATE.
SO MAYBE THEY CAN BE DEFEATED
MILITARILY.
WE'RE TALKING ABOUT SOME NUMBER
IN THE THOUSANDS IN LIBYA.
BUT REALLY, THE KEY WILL BE
FINDING PARTNERS WHO COULD BE
SUPPORTED BY THE UNITED STATES
AND EUROPE, WHO COULD BRING
GOVERNANCE, WHO CAN BRING LAW
AND ORDER AND MAKE SURE THAT THE
CONDITIONS FOR THE ISLAMIC STATE
DON'T RETURN.
>> MISSY RYAN FROM THE
"WASHINGTON POST," THANK YOU
SO MUCH.
>> THANK YOU.
>>THIS IS PBS NEWSHOUR WEEKEND,
SATURDAY.
>> Stewart: AND NOW TO "VIEWERS
LIKE YOU," YOUR CHANCE TO
COMMENT ON OUR WORK.
HERE'S WHAT SOME OF YOU SAID
ABOUT LAST WEEK'S SIGNATURE
SEGMENT ABOUT "OPERATION
PEACEMAKER," THE PROGRAM IN
RICHMOND, CALIFORNIA, THAT PAYS
YOUNG MEN WITH CRIMINAL RECORDS
A STIPEND UP TO $1,000 A
MONTH TO STAY OUT OF TROUBLE AND
AWAY FROM GUNS.
SOME VIEWERS WERE SKEPTICAL
ABOUT THE PROGRAM.
ROBERT NOLTON SAID:
"YOU CANNOT BRIBE YOUNG MEN INTO
BECOMING GOOD CITIZENS.
I AGREE WITH THE GOAL, BUT AS
USUAL THE PATH TO GET THERE IS
VERY FLAWED.
AND AFTER NINE SHORT MONTHS,
THEY ARE TOTALLY TRANSFORMED?
GOOD LUCK WITH THAT."
MIKE TOBIAS ADDED:
"HOW ABOUT BEING A MAN BY START
TAKING RESPONSIBILITY FOR YOUR
OWN ACTIONS AND LIFE!
I FOLLOW THE RULES, WHERE IS MY
REWARD?"
SOME THOUGHT THE MONEY FOR THIS
PROGRAM SHOULD BE SPENT
ELSEWHERE.
ACCORDING TO BAHMAN JAB, THE
CITY OF RICHMOND COULD:
"GIVE THEM A PRODUCTIVE JOB TO
BUILD ROADS, PAINT, CLEAN
HIGHWAYS, PLANT TREES, REMOVE
TRASH.
THEN PAY THEM."
SANDY COX ADDED:
"MAYBE IF THEY HELPED LOW INCOME
PEOPLE WITH THINGS LIKE HOUSING,
COLLEGE, JOB TRAINING, THEY
WOULDN'T HAVE TO SPEND ALL THAT
MONEY LATER ON REHABILITATION
PROJECTS."
OTHER VIEWERS WERE HOPEFUL THE
PROGRAM CAN WORK.
ANNA MARIE WROTE:
"MOST PEOPLE ARE NOT TRULY EVIL,
THEY'VE OFTEN JUST MADE BAD
DECISIONS.
MAYBE A LITTLE POSITIVE
REINFORCEMENT FOR A TEMPORARY
PERIOD WILL GO A LONG WAY.
I LIKE IT A LOT BETTER THAN THE
IDEA OF RECIDIVISM."
HEIDI MARTY SAID:
"SO OFTEN IT SIMPLY COMES DOWN
TO HOW PEOPLE REACT TO BEING
NOTICED, CARED FOR, AND HELPED
ALONG, PERHAPS FOR THE FIRST
TIME IN THEIR LIVES."
SANDY CHRISTIAN BORELLA ADDED:
"WHATEVER IT TAKES TO GIVE YOUNG
MEN HOPE FOR A DIFFERENT AND
BETTER WAY OF LIFE.
FOR FAR TOO MANY, THERE ISN'T
HOPE, CHOICES, OR GUIDANCE."
AS ALWAYS WE WELCOME YOUR
COMMENTS.
VISIT US ONLINE AT
www.pbs.org/newshour, AT
facebook.com/newshour, OR TWEET
US @NEWSHOUR.
AND FINALLY, ON THIS NATIONAL
ASTRONOMY DAY, A PHOTOGRAPHER
TOOK 200 PHOTOS OF WASHINGTON
STATE'S MOUNT RAINIER ONE NIGHT
LAST JUNE AND BLENDED THEM INTO
THIS IMAGE THAT WILL NOW BE A
POSTAGE STAMP TO COMMEMORATE THE
CENTENNIAL OF THE NATIONAL PARK
SERVICE.
FOR MORE ON THIS STORY, GO TO
OUR WEB SITE:
www.pbs.org/newshour.
THAT'S IT FOR THIS EDITION OF
PBS NEWSHOUR WEEKEND.
I'M ALISON STEWART.
THANKS FOR WATCHING, AND GOOD
NIGHT.